markdown/chapter1.md, before:

---
figPrefix:
    - "figure"
    - "figures"
---

\mainmatter

# Background

The following sections will serve as a background to the work presented in this thesis. We will start at very basic molecular biology in order to fully grasp later concepts such as gene expression, natural variation and quantitative genetics.

## The central dogma of molecular biology

One of the most fundamental concepts of biology, and also for this thesis, is the central dogma of molecular biology. It was first declared by Francis Crick [-@Crick1958] where he states that "once 'information' has passed into protein *it cannot get out again*". In other words, information flows from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) via ribonucleic acid (RNA) to protein with the help of the transcriptional machinery (@fig:central-dogma).

![DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA that in turn is translated into protein.][central-dogma]{#fig:central-dogma}

> Go on to talk about how replication is imperfect, i.e. errors are introduced and how this relates to evolution.

[central-dogma]: figures/placeholder.png

## Gene expression and its regulation

### Promoters and their role in gene expression

### Regulatory motifs

### Co-expression networks

## Natural variation

In natural populations of all organisms we see phenotypic variation, i.e. variation in the appearance or behaviour of these organisms. In bacteria, this might appear as differences in viability while in humans it might be manifested as differences in height, just to mention a couple of simple examples. This variability can be a result of environment, EXAMPLE HERE, or it can be a direct result of genotypic differences. This variation in phenotype is a manifestation of one of the most fundamental requirements for evolution; without natural variation we would not have evolution. The reason for this variation is that the machinery responsible for making new organisms, be it sexual or asexual reproduction, is error-prone. Whenever a cell divides, there is a possibility for errors. Over time these errors can accumulate, disappear or be fixed in a population depending on whether they are beneficial, neutral or even harmful for the organism.

- Mention that many of the mutations will be neutral, i.e. have no practical effect on downstream phenotypes, be it gene expression or some higher-order phenotype.
- Talk about mutations in regulatory regions, and mutations in what previously has been labeled as junk-DNA.
- Go into a small discussion on how the view of junk-DNA has changed the last ten years, and how this is a consequence of better sequencing technologies (?).

## Genetic association studies

- In order to connect genotypic variation with phenotypic variation.
- Some words on linkage and causal variants?

Commit message:

Add some co-expression points

markdown/chapter1.md, after:

---
figPrefix:
    - "figure"
    - "figures"
---

\mainmatter

# Background

The following sections will serve as a background to the work presented in this thesis. We will start at very basic molecular biology in order to fully grasp later concepts such as gene expression, natural variation and quantitative genetics.

## The central dogma of molecular biology

One of the most fundamental concepts of biology, and also for this thesis, is the central dogma of molecular biology. It was first declared by Francis Crick [-@Crick1958] where he states that "once 'information' has passed into protein *it cannot get out again*". In other words, information flows from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) via ribonucleic acid (RNA) to protein with the help of the transcriptional machinery (@fig:central-dogma).

![DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA that in turn is translated into protein.][central-dogma]{#fig:central-dogma}

> Go on to talk about how replication is imperfect, i.e. errors are introduced and how this relates to evolution.

[central-dogma]: figures/placeholder.png

## Gene expression and its regulation

### Promoters and their role in gene expression

### Regulatory motifs

### Co-expression networks

- Similarities in gene expression across conditions. For example, if two genes are both up-regulated when exposed to a cold environment, and down-regulated when exposed to a warm environment, then we can say that the two genes are co-expressed.
- Can be seen as a network structure where genes are nodes and the co-expression relationship is represented by connections (edges) between these nodes.
- Co-expression modules and how they can be identified, and more importantly, their significance.
- Characteristics of typical biological networks, e.g. scale-freeness and module enrichment analysis.

## Natural variation

In natural populations of all organisms we see phenotypic variation, i.e. variation in the appearance or behaviour of these organisms. In bacteria, this might appear as differences in viability while in humans it might be manifested as differences in height, just to mention a couple of simple examples. This variability can be a result of environment, EXAMPLE HERE, or it can be a direct result of genotypic differences. This variation in phenotype is a manifestation of one of the most fundamental requirements for evolution; without natural variation we would not have evolution. The reason for this variation is that the machinery responsible for making new organisms, be it sexual or asexual reproduction, is error-prone. Whenever a cell divides, there is a possibility for errors. Over time these errors can accumulate, disappear or be fixed in a population depending on whether they are beneficial, neutral or even harmful for the organism.

- Mention that many of the mutations will be neutral, i.e. have no practical effect on downstream phenotypes, be it gene expression or some higher-order phenotype.
- Talk about mutations in regulatory regions, and mutations in what previously has been labeled as junk-DNA.
- Go into a small discussion on how the view of junk-DNA has changed the last ten years, and how this is a consequence of better sequencing technologies (?).

## Genetic association studies

- In order to connect genotypic variation with phenotypic variation.
- Some words on linkage and causal variants?
