markdown/chapter1.1.md, before:

## Background

Some phenotypes are simple to explain from a genetic point of view. Perhaps the most famous example are the experiments conducted by Gregor Mendel between 1856 and 1863. He crossed pea plants (\textit{Pisum sativum}) having different properties; some were green, some were yellow, some were wrinkly, some were smooth. He then observed how these traits were passed down to the next generation of pea plants and thus laid the foundation for what we today refer to as the laws of Mendelian inheritance. This is something that is so fundamental in biology today that parts of it are taught already in primary school. Perhaps Mendel was just lucky, because most traits are much more complex than the ones he described [@Barsh2003; @Speliotes2010; @Wood2014]. One example of a phenotype that has been notoriously difficult to explain is human height. Human height has a very high heritability, i.e.\ a large portion of the variation in human height can be explained by genetic differences [@Visscher2008], but studies that have tried to identify the factors that contribute to the variation in human height has not succeeded to explain things as well and as simple as Mendel explained the colour of his peas. In a recent study a large team of researchers managed to find 697 genetic variants that were associated with human height, but together these variants only explained 20 percent of the variation [@Wood2014]. This is the definition of a complex trait; a trait that can only be explained by the combination of a large number of small effects that individually can be very hard to detect. These types of traits are often also referred to as non-Mendelian or polygenic, indicating that they under control by multiple genes, and possibly the interaction between these genes. Important to note however is that the individual effects that contribute to the trait follow the laws of Mendel---it is just that the combination of these effects manifests themselves in a way that does not allow it to be dissected in the same way as pea colour, for example.

@Fig:overview shows an overview of how information travels from the DNA via RNA to proteins and metabolites and how these interact to give rise to complex phenotypes. This introduction will go through this figure one concept at a time and explain the underlying biology, the data we retrieve from this biology, and finally, methods used to analyse the data.

![The different types of data and the technologies used to measure/observe them.](figures/overview.pdf){#fig:overview width=100%}

In the case of Mendel's pea plants, the traits were very visible and the difference between plants was easy to assess. There is however more subtle variation in all natural populations. In humans it might be manifested as differences in height or susceptibility to disease, and in trees, this could be something as minuscule as the texture of the bark or the width of the leaves. This variability can be a result of genotype alone, or a combination of genotype and environmental factors. An example of a trait that is determined solely by genetic factors is blood type, although most traits are results of the combination of environment and genotype, such as fingerprints [@Slatis1976]. Another of complexity is that there can be interaction between genotype and the environment (G\texttimes{}E) where the same genotype can give rise to different phenotypes based on the environment. An example of this is identical twins. They have the same genome, and any differences between a pair of twins should be possible to explain as environmental effects. Any traits that are the same despite environmental differences have a high heritability, i.e.\ the trait is determined almost exclusively by genetic factors. If twins separated at birth still are very phenotypically similar, or even identical, the trait is under tight genetic control [@Bouchard1990].

Commit message:

Reword and rearrange background
This still is not finished, but I will wait with this until
I have most other things sorted first.

markdown/chapter1.1.md, after:

## Background

Some phenotypes are simple to explain from a genetic point of view. Perhaps the most famous example are the experiments conducted by Gregor Mendel between 1856 and 1863. He crossed pea plants (\textit{Pisum sativum}) having different properties; some were green, some were yellow, some were wrinkly, some were smooth. He then observed how these traits were passed down to the next generation of pea plants and thus laid the foundation for what we today refer to as the laws of Mendelian inheritance. This is something that is so fundamental in biology today that parts of it are taught already in primary school. Perhaps Mendel was just lucky, because most traits are much more complex than the ones he described [@Barsh2003; @Speliotes2010; @Wood2014]. One example of a phenotype that has been notoriously difficult to explain is human height. Human height has a very high heritability, i.e.\ a large portion of the variation in human height can be explained by genetic differences [@Visscher2008], but studies that have tried to identify the factors that contribute to the variation in human height has not succeeded to explain things as well and as simple as Mendel explained the colour of his peas. In a recent study a large team of researchers managed to find 697 genetic variants that were associated with human height, but together these variants only explained 20 percent of the variation [@Wood2014]. This is the definition of a complex trait; a trait that can only be explained by the combination of a large number of small effects that individually can be very hard to detect. These types of traits are often also referred to as non-Mendelian or polygenic, indicating that they under control by multiple genes, and possibly the interaction between these genes. Important to note however is that the individual effects that contribute to the trait follow the laws of Mendel---it is just that the combination of these effects manifests themselves in a way that does not allow it to be dissected in the same way as pea colour, for example.

In the case of Mendel's pea plants, the traits were very visible and the difference between plants was easy to assess. There is however more subtle variation in all natural populations. In humans it might be manifested as differences in height or susceptibility to disease, and in trees, this could be something as minuscule as the texture of the bark or the width of the leaves. This variability can be a result of genotype alone, environmental factors alone, or a combination of these. A long lived debate in this area of research is the nature versus nurture debate, i.e.\ whether a particular trait arises from genetics or from the environment. Today the general consensus is that most traits are a result of the combination of both genotype and the environment that the genotype is subjected to. To add additional complexity to this is that there is also interaction between the genotype and the environment (or G\texttimes{}E), a phenomenon where different genotypes respond differently to changes in environment [@Falconer1996]. One type of study that has been used to study these types of interactions are twin studies. For example, if identical twins separated at birth still are very similar, if not identical, when it comes to a particular phenotypic trait, this trait is under tight genetic control [@Bouchard1990]. Consequently, the trait is then also highly heritable.

@Fig:overview shows an overview of how information travels from the DNA via RNA to proteins and metabolites and how these interact to give rise to complex phenotypes. This introduction will go through this figure one concept at a time and explain the underlying biology, the data we retrieve from this biology, and finally, methods used to analyse the data.

![The different types of data and the technologies used to measure/observe them.](figures/overview.pdf){#fig:overview width=100%}
