# Paper summaries

This chapter will give a short summary for each paper included in the thesis. paper I deals with gene regulation in a cyanobacterium, while papers II--IV treats gene expression, genotypes, and phenotypes in the deciduous tree *Populus tremula* (European aspen).

## Paper I --- Gene regulation in a cyanobacterium

*Synechocystis* is a fresh water cyanobacterium and it is one of the most studied cyanobacteria to date, and it is used as a model system for nitrogen fixation and photosynthesis amongst other things. Even though the genome of *Synechocystis* was sequenced already in 1996, most of the genes in its genome are still annotated as having unknown function. In this paper, we make an effort to enable researchers working with *Synechocystis* to explore the gene expression and the gene regulation of this organism *in silico* in order to find potential candidate genes for e.g.\ knock-out experiments with the web application *Syn*ergy. We collected 371 microarray experiments from public sources and constructed a co-expression network. As mentioned in @sec:coexpression, a co-expression network is simply a manifestation of the underlying regulatory network, so in order to form a link between co-expression and co-regulation, potential regulatory motifs were identified using phylogenetic footprinting. This method is based on the alignment of regulatory regions of orthologous genes from related organisms. In this case, 22 genomes from the Chroococcales taxon were used for the phylogenetic footprinting, and this resulted in a set of 4,977 potential regulatory motifs. The user of the application can then investigate whether their gene set of interest is co-expressed, and whether this to some extent can be explained by shared regulatory motifs. In order to make the application as useful as possible, the gene identifiers used are the well established identifiers from CyanoBase (\url{http://genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase/}; @Nakao:2010bo).

As part of a sanity check of the integrated data, a couple of case studies were conducted where both previously published results were confirmed, and also potentially novel regulatory relationships were presented.

*Syn*ergy is publicly available at \url{http://synergy.plantgenie.org}.

## Paper II --- Two-class phenotype prediction

The majority of angiosperms are monoecious or hermaphroditic, i.e.\ each individual has both male and female flowers, or the flowers have both male and female organs, respectively. This is not the case for about 4% of flowering plants, including the genus *Populus* which is dioecious (with a few exceptions). It is thought that the formation of a dioecious species evolved from hermaphrodites and thus have not yet evolved distinct sex chromosomes, as is the case in mammals. When the sexes are separated constraints on the phenotype are released as the individual sexes adapt to a new fitness optimum, and this would then give rise to sexual dimorphism, i.e.\ phenotypical differences between the sexes. Previous studies in *Populus* species have shown that there is likely a sex determining region on chromosome 19, but so far no study has looked at global phenotype and gene expression patterns to look for sexual dimorphism.

In paper II we show that there are no significant phenotypical differences in a range of phenotypes in *Populus tremula*. The phenotypes include different biomass traits such as height and diameter, and also a range of secondary metabolites involved in herbivore defence. In addition to the more classical phenotypes, differences in gene expression was investigated by classifying samples as male or female with a support vector machine on genes inside sliding windows across the genome. The rationale behind the sliding window approach comes from the fact that there is a consensus that there is a sex determining locus. This locus might contain more than one gene, and individual genes might not be able to fully explain the sex division. However, in this case the analysis did result in any gene combinations that could predict sex any better than single genes. Single gene gene expression differences were investigated using the more simple approach of differential gene expression. Only two genes were found to be significantly differentially expressed between the sexes, and one of those were located in a region previously linked to sex determination. As reported by [@Pakull2015], part of this gene is deleted in females, and this was independently discovered by us as well. This deletion thus gives rise to the difference in expression of this gene.

## Paper III --- Genetic basis of gene expression variation

Natural variation is perhaps the most important aspect of biology; if we would not have variation, we would not have evolution. Some of this variability can be explained by environmental factors while some can be explained by genetic factors. In paper III we take a closer look at the natural variation in gene expression in *Populus tremula* by performing eQTL mapping and constructing a co-expression network from gene expression data from a natural population of *P. tremula* spanning the latitudinal gradient of Sweden. In total, RNA-Sequencing and DNA-Sequencing data from 81 distinct genotypes were used for the study.

Many of the results were similar to what other studies previously have found, such as local eQTL being easier to detect than distant eQTL. Many other studies have reported the existence of *trans*-eQTL hotspots. These are loci that are associated with a large number of genes. This is however something we did not find in our data. If this is due to the relatively small sample size or if it is an effect of the type of population we have is difficult to say. We found that genes whose expression was associated with genetic variants were more likely to be located in the periphery of the co-expression network, i.e.\ they were less central than expected by chance.

## Paper IV --- Leaf shape GWAS and data integration

In contrast to paper II and paper III where a one-gene-at-a-time (or mostly pairs of genes), paper IV puts more emphasis on the complexity of leaf traits as they emerge from the interaction of many genes. Previous studies of leaf shape has shown that it serves as a good proxy for xxx and xxx [REFS], and that leaf shape also is highly polygeneic [@Tian2011].
