markdown/intro.md, before:

\mainmatter

# Background

The following sections will serve as a background to the work presented in this thesis. We will start at very basic molecular biology in order to fully grasp later concepts such as gene expression, natural variation and quantitative genetics.

## 1. The central dogma of molecular biology

One of the most fundamental concepts of biology, and also for this thesis, is the central dogma of molecular biology. It was first declared by Francis Crick [-@Crick1958] where he states that "once 'information' has passed into protein *it cannot get out again*". In other words, information flows from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) via ribonucleic acid (RNA) to protein with the help of the transcriptional machinery.

![central-dogma][The central dogma]

[central-dogma]: figures/central_dogma.eps

## 2. Phenotypic variation in natural populations

In natural populations of all organisms we see phenotypic variation, i.e. variation in the appearance or behaviour of these organisms. In bacteria, this might appear as differences in viability while in humans it might be manifested as differences in height, just to mention a couple of simple examples. This variability can be a result of environment, EXAMPLE HERE, or it can be a direct result of genotypic differences. This variation in phenotype is a manifestation of one of the most fundamental requirements for evolution; without natural variation we would not have evolution. The reason for this variation is that the machinery responsible for making new organisms, be it sexual or asexual reproduction, is error-prone. Whenever a cell divides, there is a possibility for errors. Over time these errors can accumulate, disappear or be fixed in a population depending on whether they are benificial, neutral or even harmful for the organism.

Commit message:

Figure cross referencing and placeholder figure

markdown/intro.md, after:

\mainmatter

# Background

The following sections will serve as a background to the work presented in this thesis. We will start at very basic molecular biology in order to fully grasp later concepts such as gene expression, natural variation and quantitative genetics.

## 1. The central dogma of molecular biology

One of the most fundamental concepts of biology, and also for this thesis, is the central dogma of molecular biology. It was first declared by Francis Crick [-@Crick1958] where he states that "once 'information' has passed into protein *it cannot get out again*". In other words, information flows from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) via ribonucleic acid (RNA) to protein with the help of the transcriptional machinery (Figure @fig:central-dogma).

![The central dogma][central-dogma]{#fig:central-dogma}

[central-dogma]: figures/placeholder.png

## 2. Phenotypic variation in natural populations

In natural populations of all organisms we see phenotypic variation, i.e. variation in the appearance or behaviour of these organisms. In bacteria, this might appear as differences in viability while in humans it might be manifested as differences in height, just to mention a couple of simple examples. This variability can be a result of environment, EXAMPLE HERE, or it can be a direct result of genotypic differences. This variation in phenotype is a manifestation of one of the most fundamental requirements for evolution; without natural variation we would not have evolution. The reason for this variation is that the machinery responsible for making new organisms, be it sexual or asexual reproduction, is error-prone. Whenever a cell divides, there is a possibility for errors. Over time these errors can accumulate, disappear or be fixed in a population depending on whether they are beneficial, neutral or even harmful for the organism.
